# A Wasm to Go translator

To translate a Wasm module to Go, use the following command:
```
wasm2go < input.wasm > output.go
```

The input is a Wasm module, and the output is a single Go source file,
with no dependencies beyond the standard library.

The Go file forms a self-contained package,
that exports a structure called `Module`
and a `New` function to initialize it.

The methods of the `Module` structure are the Wasm module's exports,
whereas imports are interfaces that `New` consumes.

We assume the input Wasm modules can be trusted.
At a minimum, you should run Wasm modules through a verifier
before attempting to convert an untrusted module.

The current target is a useful subset of Wasm produced by `clang`,
including the following features:
- [bulk memory instructions] and [reference types];
- [non-trapping float-to-int conversions];
- [sign-extension instructions];
- [multi-value results];
- 64-bit address space;
- [extended constant expressions].

[bulk memory instructions]: https://clang.llvm.org/docs/ClangCommandLineReference.html#cmdoption-clang-mbulk-memory
[reference types]: https://clang.llvm.org/docs/ClangCommandLineReference.html#cmdoption-clang-mreference-types
[non-trapping float-to-int conversions]: https://clang.llvm.org/docs/ClangCommandLineReference.html#cmdoption-clang-mnontrapping-fptoint
[sign-extension instructions]: https://clang.llvm.org/docs/ClangCommandLineReference.html#cmdoption-clang-msign-ext
[multi-value results]: https://clang.llvm.org/docs/ClangCommandLineReference.html#cmdoption-clang-mmultivalue
[extended constant expressions]: https://clang.llvm.org/docs/ClangCommandLineReference.html#cmdoption-clang-mextended-const

Generating human-readable Go code is a non-goal:
- Wasm names must be mangled into Go identifiers;
- Wasm control flow is implemented with `goto` and labels;
- Go's distinction between `bool` and `int32` requires
  spurious control flow and type conversions;
- Go's distinction between signed and unsigned integers
  requires frequent type conversions;
- Go's untyped numeric literals require explicit type conversions;
- Go's constant evaluator does not match Wasm semantics,
  requiring workarounds to avoid constant folding/propagation;
- float operations require type conversions to avoid being combined;
- float literals can't represent negative zero, infinities, or `NaN`;
- Go forbids unused variables/labels/etc.

Many of these introduce unnecessary verbosity,
but they're necessary for semantic correctness.

Judge the output by the assembly generated by the Go compiler,
not by how a human would read it.

For some CPUs, you can generate faster code by using `unsafe`.
Despite the scary name, the generated code abides by the
[rules of unsafe](https://pkg.go.dev/unsafe#Pointer),
and all memory accesses are bounds checked.

Another knob is whether to attempt to ensure float operations
[canonicalize NaNs](https://github.com/WebAssembly/design/issues/1463).
This is tested to work on both `amd64` and `arm64`,
but is known to be broken on most other architectures.

```
Usage: wasm2go [options] [input.wasm]
  -embed
        go:embed data sections from a .dat file
  -nanbox
        whether to try to canonicalize NaNs
  -nohost
        disable generating interfaces for imports
  -noopt
        disable all optimization passes
  -o string
        output file (default stdout)
  -provided value
        file containing provided import functions
  -tags string
        go:build tags to include in the generated file
  -unsafe
        allow importing unsafe
```

If you suspect `wasm2go` is producing invalid code,
please try `noopt` before submitting a bug report.
